An Introduction to Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security Protocol (#1485)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: articles/ssl-tls/index.md

### An Introduction to Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security Protocol

![hero-image](/engineering-education/ssl-tls/hero.jpg)

Photo by [Markus Spiske](https://unsplash.com/@markusspiske?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/iar-afB0QQw?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText)

> **Introduction**

Reviewer: Please change all these headings to h3. Change it for all the headings in this article.

Example: 

```markdown
### Introduction
```

> 2020 was a challenging year that resulted in some crucial, groundbreaking innovations and changes across domains. With the pandemic compelling various operations and workforce to go remote, thereby leaving the infrastructure susceptible to increased cyber attacks, the need for security has undoubtedly been reinforced. Anti-malware softwares, intrusion prevention systems, firewalls, Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) are some of the rudimentary technologies required to safeguard your resources these days. In this article, we will focus on one such security technique i.e SSL/TLS communication encryption protocol. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2020 was a challenging year that resulted in some crucial, groundbreaking innovation and changes across domains. The pandemic has compelled various operations and workforce to go remote, and has left the infrastructure susceptible to increased cyber attacks. The need for security has undoubtedly been reinforced. Anti-malware software, intrusion prevention systems, firewalls, Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) are some of the rudimentary technologies required to safeguard your resources these days. In this article, we will focus on one such security technique i.e SSL/TLS communication encryption protocol. 
```

> In simple terms, encryption is the process of converting data into another form (referred to as Cipher text) that can be understood only by parties that possess a secret decryption key. To everybody else, it’s gibberish.  [Google's transparency report](https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/overview?hl=en) shows the significant increase in the amount of encrypted traffic on the internet over the last few years. As of December 2020, approximately 95% of all traffic across Google was encrypted. Many web browsers have been relentlessly pushing websites to use encryption by marking HTTP sites as unsafe. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In simple terms, encryption is the process of converting data into another form (referred to as Ciphertext) that can be understood only by parties that possess a secret decryption key. To everybody else, it’s gibberish.  [Google's transparency report](https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/overview?hl=en) shows a significant increase in the amount of encrypted traffic on the internet over the last few years. As of December 2020, approximately 95% of all traffic across Google was encrypted. Many web browsers have been relentlessly pushing websites to use encryption by marking HTTP sites as unsafe. 
```

**What makes HTTPS sites safe?**

Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure ([HTTPS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTPS)) is an extension of Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). All HTTPS traffic is encrypted using a communication protocol called Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)/ Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol.

**What is SSL/TLS?**

Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and its successor, Transport Layer Security (TLS) are encryption protocols designed to ensure security, reliability and authenticity of the information being exchanged. Although SSL is deprecated and replaced by TLS, the industry uses the two terms interchangeably. To avoid confusion, we’ll continue to refer to TLS as SSL/TLS throughout this article.

**History of SSL/TLS**

> The earliest original SSL protocols were developed at Netscape. SSL 2.0 was the first version to be released to the public in 1995. SSL 2.0 had vulnerabilities and consequently, [SSL 3.0](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6101) was developed and released in the following year. In 2014, SSL 3.0 was found to be vulnerable to the [POODLE attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POODLE). It was deprecated in 2015. SSL 3.0 was shortly followed by TLS 1.0 in 1999. We’ve had TLS 1.1, TLS 1.2 and TLS 1.3 so far. TLS 1.0 and TLS 1.1 were deprecated in 2020. You can read more about the protocol’s history and development [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security#History_and_development).

Reviewer: > POODLE Attack

It would be great if you could give a brief description of the attack and what it is in 1-2 lines

> ![SSL/TLS Timeline](/engineering-education/ssl-tls/timeline.png)

Reviewer: Please include source attributions for images taken from external sources.

Author: These images are self-made on diagram.net

Before we dive into the working of SSL/TLS, let us familiarise ourselves with a few technical terms:

> 1. [Encryption](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encryption)  is a cryptological technique of converting data in its original form (known as plaintext) into an alternative form (known as cipher text) that can be deciphered only by authorised parties. The conversion is done by a cryptological algorithm (cipher) that takes a secret “key” as the input to reverse the action. Although encryption does not prevent intrusion, it aids in securing your data by rendering it useless to overhearers. Only those in possession of the decryption key will be able to decipher it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Encryption](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encryption)  is a cryptological technique of converting data in its original form (known as plaintext) into an alternative form (known as ciphertext) that can be deciphered only by authorised parties. The conversion is done by a cryptological algorithm (cipher) that takes a secret “key” as the input to reverse the action. Although encryption does not prevent intrusion, it aids in securing your data by rendering it useless to overhearers. Only those in possession of the decryption key will be able to decipher it.
```

Two of the most widely used encryption techniques are briefly explained below:

    - **Symmetric key encryption** is the technique of encrypting information using cryptographic algorithms that use the same key for encryption and decryption. Such algorithms are called symmetric ciphers. When Alice and Bob communicate, they encrypt and decrypt their messages using a shared key. Care should be taken that this shared key isn’t compromised because it allows anybody to decrypt the ciphertext.

        ![Symmetric key encryption](/engineering-education/ssl-tls/Sym.png)

    - **Asymmetric key encryption** (also called public-key encryption) is the technique of encrypting information using cryptographic algorithms that use different keys for encryption and decryption. Such algorithms are called asymmetric ciphers. When Alice sends a message to Bob, she encrypts it using Bob’s public key. Bob decrypts Alice’s message using his private key, which isn’t known to anybody but him. Asymmetric encryption is more secure than symmetric encryption. However, it is computationally more expensive.

         ![Asymmetric key encryption](/engineering-education/ssl-tls/Asym.png)

> 2. **Cipher Suites** are a set of algorithms that are used to secure information being exchanged by the end points. A cipher suite announces the key exchange algorithm, the authentication algorithm, the bulk encryption algorithm and the Message Authentication Code (MAC) algorithm it supports. For example, the  `ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384` suite implies that ECDHE is the key exchange algorithm, ECDSA is the authentication algorithm, AES256-GCM is the bulk encryption algorithm and SHA384 is the MAC algorithm it uses. Cipher suites are updated with safer algorithms from time to time. You can find out more about cipher suites [here](https://www.venafi.com/blog/what-are-cipher-suites).

Reviewer: > the key exchange algorithm, the authentication algorithm, the bulk encryption algorithm and the Message Authentication Code (MAC) algorithm 

Elaborate a little about these in 1-2 lines each

> 2. **Cipher Suites** are a set of algorithms that are used to secure information being exchanged by the end points. A cipher suite announces the key exchange algorithm, the authentication algorithm, the bulk encryption algorithm and the Message Authentication Code (MAC) algorithm it supports. For example, the  `ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384` suite implies that ECDHE is the key exchange algorithm, ECDSA is the authentication algorithm, AES256-GCM is the bulk encryption algorithm and SHA384 is the MAC algorithm it uses. Cipher suites are updated with safer algorithms from time to time. You can find out more about cipher suites [here](https://www.venafi.com/blog/what-are-cipher-suites).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Cipher Suites** are a set of algorithms that are used to secure information being exchanged by the endpoints. A cipher suite announces the key exchange algorithm, the authentication algorithm, the bulk encryption algorithm and the Message Authentication Code (MAC) algorithm it supports. For example, the  `ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384` suite implies that ECDHE is the key exchange algorithm, ECDSA is the authentication algorithm, AES256-GCM is the bulk encryption algorithm and SHA384 is the MAC algorithm it uses. Cipher suites are updated with safer algorithms from time to time. You can find out more about cipher suites [here](https://www.venafi.com/blog/what-are-cipher-suites).
```

3. **SSL certificates** are digital data files that bind an organisation/domain name to a cryptographic key. SSL certificates are issued by Certificate Authorities (CAs) after verification of the data provided by the organisation. By signing and issuing an SSL certificate, the CA assures that the information enclosed in it is valid. 

**How does SSL/TLS work?**

> As discussed before, public-key encryption requires high compute and adds considerable overhead. SSL/TLS, thus, makes use of public-key encryption just in the beginning, to exchange session keys. These session keys are symmetric in nature and are used to carry out the rest of the communication. SSL/TLS handshake is a part of an SSL/TLS exchange wherein the two end points exchange messages and establish the details of their communication. Since SSL/TLS is most widely used to encrypt web traffic, we’ll use a web client and server as examples of end points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As discussed before, public-key encryption requires high compute and adds considerable overhead. SSL/TLS, thus, makes use of public-key encryption just in the beginning, to exchange session keys. These session keys are symmetric in nature and are used to carry out the rest of the communication. SSL/TLS handshake is a part of an SSL/TLS exchange wherein the two endpoints exchange messages and establishes the details of their communication. Since SSL/TLS is most widely used to encrypt web traffic, we’ll use a web client and server as examples of endpoints.
```
